---
title: Task management in Obsidian
date: 2022-09-09 12:00
categories: [Guides]
background: "/assets/backgrounds/EjHkHfKXYAEdwp4.jpg"
background_alt: "Image by https://twitter.com/krishnanunnihm"  
---

This post aims to demonstrate the flexibility of the [Obsidian](https://obsidian.md) environment, by showing how it has been configured to support a personal workflow for task management across multiple active software development and research projects. It therefore has a wider scope than the biodiversity informatics research management focus described in other posts on the [echinopscis](https://echinopscis.github.io) project blog. I also try to provide some pointers to researchers and technologists wanting to manage their own working environment in Obsidian, for task or research management, or for other purposes.

## Task management

Like all of us, I work on many projects at once. My work is almost all online, so I can work on tasks from anywhere - which is good for flexibility, but needs disciplined management to avoid the risk of burnout. As I don't have spatial boundaries, I need to set up my own working practices to enable focus. Its important for me to be able to clearly define tasks, see what is blocked or waiting for external input, and to assess status across a whole set of projects.

## Working practices are personal

Whilst I still use hard copy notebooks, (and I probably always will), I often need quicker navigation between different interdependent projects than I can manage on paper. 

<blockquote class="twitter-tweet"><p lang="en" dir="ltr">phd thesis submitted. Here it is in source form: my 3.5 year stack of notebooks <a href="https://t.co/yjZgT7FcWC">pic.twitter.com/yjZgT7FcWC</a></p>&mdash; Nicky Nicolson (@nickynicolson) <a href="https://twitter.com/nickynicolson/status/1164853305522163713?ref_src=twsrc%5Etfw">August 23, 2019</a></blockquote> <script async src="https://platform.twitter.com/widgets.js" charset="utf-8"></script>

I also like to have a really high-level overview of projects - and of pieces of writing, so that I can rearrange sections and paragraphs to get a better flow. I used a kanban board to manage the the most complex thing I've written so far (phd thesis) - using one board for the overall structure, which linked to a board for each chapter, allowing the design of a coherent structure at chapter, section and paragraph level.

## Obsidian evaluation

### Information storage

I started evaluating Obsidian as I liked the use of open text based file formats (Markdown and YAML), stored on a local filesystem. Using these for long term data storage seems both future proof and flexible. 

<blockquote class="twitter-tweet"><p lang="en" dir="ltr">I will openly admit I vastly underrated how comforting it is in <a href="https://twitter.com/obsdmd?ref_src=twsrc%5Etfw">@obsdmd</a> to know that all my notes and attachments are always stored in neat folders on my own computer. <br><br>No matter what happens to Obsidian in the future my content is totally fine.</p>&mdash; Joseph Wood (@josephmwood) <a href="https://twitter.com/josephmwood/status/1565318233367904258?ref_src=twsrc%5Etfw">September 1, 2022</a></blockquote> <script async src="https://platform.twitter.com/widgets.js" charset="utf-8"></script>

It also means that the data can be manipulated by different tools if necessary (for example to automate bulk changes, make reports etc).


### Supporting alternative views

Obsidian also supports some powerful alternative views of the information in the system. One of the core plugins is the [graph view](https://help.obsidian.md/Plugins/Graph+view), which shows the links between notes and allows nodes to be categorised and differentiated using search syntax. A useful community plugin enables a [kanban board view](https://github.com/mgmeyers/obsidian-kanban) of a set of lists of tasks - enabling a high level overview of project status. 

## Task manager design

My task manager is designed as a "vault" (working space) in Obsidian with an intentionally small number of plugins. (If you're interested in evaluating Obsidian plugins - and the community is really active is producing new plugins and updates - then my advice is to keep a separate vault for that)

### Structure

#### Inbox
Contains any unsorted notes for processing and an **inbox-kanban** note to manage "atomic" tasks (those that aren't part of an on-going project)

#### Meetings
Contains meeting notes / agendas for anything from 1:1s to conferences. Notes are filed into **Past** or **Upcoming** subdirectories

#### Projects
Contains project overviews and tasks. Each project is a sub-directory with a meaningful name containing:

- A markdown project overview note with sections for summary, link to list of tasks (see below), list of people involved, a timeline and a reference section
- A list of tasks managed as a kanban board with list columns for backlog, prioritised, blocked, scheduled, done
- A files subdirectory for relevant PDFs, word documents etc

[Templates](https://help.obsidian.md/Plugins/Templates) define the high level structure for the project overview and kanban board notes

 Project subdirectories are filed into one of:
- **active** those projects being worked on at the moment
- **paused** projects that are not currently active but may be restarted (eg grant applications which have been submitted and are awaiting review)
- **reference-archive** projects that are finished, but retained for reference

Other sub-directories under projects are used to hold notes that link related projects into a programme (**programme-groups**) and notes about things that could develop into projects (**ideas**).

#### Reference

This is a flexible space for a whole set of reference subdirectories, including **data sources**, **data standards**, technical **libraries**, **recruitment** materials etc. A couple of these are worth looking at in depth: 

- **persons**: holds a note page for each person referenced in the vault, holding at least their full name and email address. [Nested tags](https://help.obsidian.md/Plugins/Tag+pane#Nested+tags) are used to indicate organisation and department, and aliases in the YAML frontmatter allow the use of initials and short names. As notes and tasks are linked to people, its possible to use [backlinks](https://help.obsidian.md/Plugins/Backlinks) to see all current collaborations / conversations with a person.
- **literature**: holds a note page for each literature reference that I'm currently using. I link my reference manager ([Zotero](https://www.zotero.org/) with [Better Bibtex](https://retorque.re/zotero-better-bibtex/)) to Obsidian using the [citations](https://github.com/hans/obsidian-citation-plugin) plugin. (A later post will describe this setup in depth).  

#### Util
A place to store utilities like templates (and scripts). Excluded from searches in the obsidian configuration settings.

##### Templates 
###### Project summary
Defines sections for summary (a single sentence overview or project and aims with a link to list of tasks on an associated kanban board) list of people involved, a timeline and a reference section. Tagged as \#project.

###### Project kanban board
Defines columns for backlog, prioritised, scheduled, blocked, complete. Tagged as \#kanban/project.

###### Paper outline kanban board
Defines columns for abstract, introduction, materials/methods, results, conclusions, and endmatter (acknowledgements, author contributions etc). Tagged as \#kanban/paper.

### Usage
#### Incoming work
Any unsorted notes are created under **inbox**; any atomic (non project) tasks are entered into the **inbox kanban** board. 

#### Project / task management

**Defining a new project**
Create a new subdirectory under projects\active - eg to set up a new project called "obsidian evaluation":
> - *obsidian evaluation\\*
> 	- files\ - subdirectory for PDFs / word documents
> 	- *obsidian evaluation* - created from project template
> 	- *obsidian evaluation kanban*  - created from kanban template

**Pausing / unpausing a project**
To pause a project drag its subdirectory from **active** to **paused** (and reverse to unpause).

The status of a project (active / paused etc) can be included in a search by using the `path` search term specifier, eg to find paused projects use: `path:paused tag:#project`

#### Writing 

I also use the kanban plugin to help plan writing (and presentations). I have a template for a research article plan, which defines columns for the sections of the article, so that I can add cards representing the paragraph content of the sections. I can then quickly drag paragraphs around to restructure the plan, and check across between sections e.g. to ensure that all things included in results have a corresponding entry in methods. 

#### Periodic (eg weekly) review 

Every week or so, review the content of the system, check its up to date, archive any completed tasks etc. 

- **inbox** 
	- file any notes to relevant project page or to reference
	- process the inbox kanban (more details on kanban review process below)
- **per-project** (Its possible to get a list of all active project kanban boards with a [search](https://help.obsidian.md/Plugins/Search) - searches can also be saved for reuse by starring them). Work through each active project and make some standard checks:
	- kanban board:
		- is the **backlog** complete 
		- is the order of **prioritised** tasks up to date
		- does anything in **blocked** need a nudge (eg a reminder email)
		- is anything in **scheduled** now passed
		- finally, archive the cards in the **completed** column
			The kanban plugin is set up to add a formatted date and tag to tasks on archive, which means that it is possible to get a list of all tasks completed in a particular week with a task query, e.g.: `task-done:("2022-08-02 #archive")`
	- project page:
		- add any **timeline** entries
		- move any relevant notes from **inbox** to the **reference** section of the project page
	
## Summary

Hopefully this overview has shown that it is possible to design a very customised system in Obsidian with a small number of well-supported plugins. 

In this task management system, data can be searched at various levels of granularity using tag, path and task searches (see more about search syntax [here](https://help.obsidian.md/Plugins/Search#Search+operators)). The links between project elements and people can be used to get an overview of the context surrounding a project or a person, using either backlinks or the graph view. 

Core Obsidian functionality (and its plugin ecosystem) is still evolving very quickly. This means that it can be tempting to continually refine the system. It may be a bit recursive, but I manage the development of my task management system as a project in itself. Planning time for plugin evaluation and process modification - and weighing these "meta" activities against competing priorities - helps focus more on what needs to change, rather than modification for its own sake.

Finally, the fact that you can configure the tool based on your personal conception of your work - rather than changing your working practices to fit with a particular tool - means you can design a natural fit for your task / research management workflow.
